letters to nature

larvae collected randomly in the ﬁeld (28 48.129 N, 418 40.339 E) by SCUBA. Between 5 and
10 juveniles were recruited successfully in each of 15, 1 l polystyrene containers (n ¼ 15),
the bottom of which was covered with an acetate sheet that served as substratum for
sponge attachment. Containers were then randomly distributed in 3 groups, and sponges
in each group were reared for 14 weeks in 3 different concentrations of Si(OH)4:
0:741 6 0:133, 30:235 6 0:287 and 100:041 6 0:760 mM (mean 6 s:e:). All cultures were
prepared using 0.22 mm polycarbonate-ﬁltered seawater, which was collected from the
sponge habitat, handled according to standard methods to prevent Si contamination29 and
enriched in dissolved silica, when treatments required, by using Na2SiF6. During the
experiment, all sponges were fed by weekly addition of 2 ml of a bacterial culture
(40–60 3 106 bacteria ml 2 1) to each container30. The seawater was replaced weekly, with
regeneration of initial food and Si(OH)4 levels. The concentration of Si(OH)4 in cultures
was determined on 3 replicates of 1 ml seawater samples per container by using a Bran-
Luebbe TRAACS 2000 nutrient autoanalyser. After week 5, the accidental contamination
of some culture containers by diatoms rendered subsequent estimates of Si uptake by
sponges unreliable, so we discarded them for the study.

For the study of the skeleton, sponges were treated according to standard methods30 and

examined in a Hitachi S-2300 scanning electron microscope (SEM).

Received 21 April; accepted 16 August 1999.

1. Hartman, W. D., Wendt, J. W. & Wiedenmayer, F. Living and fossil sponges. Notes for a short course.

Sedimentia 8, 1–274 (1980).

2. Ghiold, J. The sponges that spanned Europe. New Scient. 129, 58–62 (1991).
3. Leinfelder, R. R. Upper Jurassic reef types and controlling factors. Proﬁl 5, 1–45 (1993).
4. Wiedenmayer, F. Contributions to the knowledge of post-Paleozoic neritic and archibental sponges

(Porifera). Schweiz. Pala¨ont. Abh. 116, 1–147 (1994).

5. Le´vi, C. in Fossil and Recent Sponges (eds Reitner, J. & Keupp, H.) 72–82 (Springer, New York, 1991).
6. Moret, L. Contribution a` l’e´tude des spongiaires siliceux du Miocene de l’Algerie. Me´m. Soc. Ge´ol. Fr.

1, 1-27 (1924).

7. Vacelet, J. Indications de profondeur donne´s par les Spongiaires dans les milieux benthiques actuels.

Ge´ol. Me´diterr. 15, 13–26 (1988).

8. Maldonado, M. & Young, C. M. Bathymetric patterns of sponge distribution on the Bahamian slope.

Deep-Sea Res. I 43, 897–915 (1996).

9. Lowenstam, H. A. & Weiner, S. On Biomineralization (Oxford Univ., Oxford, 1989).
10. Maliva, R. G., Knoll, A. H. & Siever, R. Secular change in chert distribution: a reﬂection of evolving

biological participation in the silica cycle. Palaios 4, 519–532 (1989).

11. Nelson, D. M., Tre´guer, P., Brzezinski, M. A., Leynaert, A. & Que´guiner, B. Production and dissolution

of biogenic silica in the ocean: revised global estimates, comparison with regional data and
relationship to biogenic sedimentation. Glob. Biochem. Cycles 9, 359–372 (1995).

12. Tre´guer, P. et al. The silica balance in the world ocean: a reestimate. Science 268; 375–379 (1995).
13. Calvert, S. E. in Silicon Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry (ed. Aston, S. R.) 143–186 (Academic,

London, 1983).

14. Lisitzyn, A. P. Sedimentation in the world ocean. Soc. Econ. Palaeon. Mineral. Spec. Pub. 17, 1–218

(1972).

15. Weinberg, S. De´couvrir la Me´diterrane´e (E´ ditions Nathan, Paris, 1993).
16. Maldonado, M. & Uriz, M. J. Skeletal morphology of two controversial poecilosclerid genera (Porifera,

Demospongiae): Discorhabdella and Crambe. Helgola¨nder Meeresunters. 50; 369–390 (1996).

17. Hinde, G. J. & Holmes, W. M. On the sponge remains in the Lower Tertiary strata near Oamaru, New

Zealand. J. Linn. Soc. Zool. 24, 177–262 (1892).

18. Kelly-Borges, M. & Pomponi, S. A. Phylogeny and classiﬁcation of lithisthid sponges (Porifera:

Demospongiae): a preliminary assessment using ribosomal DNA sequence comparisons. Mol. Mar.
Biol. Biotech. 3, 87–103 (1994).

19. Mostler, H. Poriferenspiculae der alpinen Trias. Geol. Pala¨ont. Mitt. Innsbruck. 6, 1–42 (1976).
20. Palmer, T. J. & Fu¨rsich, F. T. Ecology of sponge reefs from the Upper Bathonian of Normandy.

Palaeontology 24, 1–23 (1981).

21. Burckle, L. H. in Introduction to Marine Micropaleontology (eds Haq, B. U. & Boersma, A.) 245–266

(Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1978).

22. Austin, B. Underwater birdwatching. Canadian Tech. Rep. Hydro. Ocean. Sci. 38, 83–90 (1984).
23. Koltun, V. M. in The Biology of the Porifera (ed. Fry, W. G.) 285–297 (Academic, London, 1970).
24. Tabachnick, K. R. in Sponges in Time and Space (eds van Soest, R. M. W., van Kempen, T. M. G. &

Braekman, J. C.) 225–232 (A. A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1994).

25. Harper, H. E. & Knoll, A. H. Silica, diatoms and Cenozoic radiolarian evolution. Geology 3, 175–177

(1975).

26. Hartman, W. D. in Silicon and Siliceous Structures in Biological Systems (eds Simpson, T. L. & Volcani,

B. E.) 453–493 (Springer Verlag, New York, 1981).

27. Pisera, A. Upper Jurassic siliceous sponges from Swabian Alb: taxonomy and paleoecology. Palaeont.

Pol. 57, 1–216 (1997).

28. Reincke, T. & Barthel, D. Silica uptake kinetics of Halichondria panicea in Kiel Bight. Mar. Biol. 129,

591–593 (1997).

29. Grasshoff, K., Ehrardt, M. & Kremling, K. Methods of Seawater Analysis (Verlag Chemie, Weinheim,

1983).

30. Maldonado, M. & Uriz, M. J. An experimental approach to the ecological signiﬁcance of microhabitat-

scale movement in an encrusting sponge. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 185, 239–255 (1999).

Acknowledgements
We thank S. Pla for help with nutrient analyses, technicians of the Servicio de Microscopia
for help with SEM, and E. Ballesteros, C. M. Young, A. Pisera and R. Rycroft for comments
on the manuscript.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.M.
(e-mail: maldonado@ceab.csic.es).

.................................................................
Learning the parts of objects by
non-negative matrix factorization

Daniel D. Lee* & H. Sebastian Seung*†

* Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974, USA
† Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA

.......................................... ......................... ......................... ......................... .........................
Is perception of the whole based on perception of its parts? There
is psychological1 and physiological2,3 evidence for parts-based
representations in the brain, and certain computational theories
of object recognition rely on such representations4,5. But little is
known about how brains or computers might learn the parts of
objects. Here we demonstrate an algorithm for non-negative
matrix factorization that is able to learn parts of faces and
semantic features of text. This is in contrast to other methods,
such as principal components analysis and vector quantization,
that learn holistic, not parts-based, representations. Non-negative
matrix factorization is distinguished from the other methods by
its use of non-negativity constraints. These constraints lead to a
parts-based representation because they allow only additive, not
subtractive, combinations. When non-negative matrix factoriza-
tion is implemented as a neural network, parts-based representa-
tions emerge by virtue of two properties: the ﬁring rates of
neurons are never negative and synaptic strengths do not
change sign.

We have applied non-negative matrix factorization (NMF),
together with principal components analysis (PCA) and vector
quantization (VQ), to a database of facial images. As shown in
Fig. 1, all three methods learn to represent a face as a linear
combination of basis images, but with qualitatively different results.
VQ discovers a basis consisting of prototypes, each of which is a
whole face. The basis images for PCA are ‘eigenfaces’, some of which
resemble distorted versions of whole faces6. The NMF basis is
radically different: its images are localized features that correspond
better with intuitive notions of the parts of faces.

How does NMF learn such a representation, so different from the
holistic representations of PCA and VQ? To answer this question, it
is helpful to describe the three methods in a matrix factorization
framework. The image database is regarded as an n 3 m matrix V,
each column of which contains n non-negative pixel values of one of
the m facial images. Then all three methods construct approximate
factorizations of the form V < WH, or
< ðWHÞim ¼ ^r

W iaHam

V im

ð1Þ

a¼1

The r columns of W are called basis images. Each column of H is
called an encoding and is in one-to-one correspondence with a face
in V. An encoding consists of the coefﬁcients by which a face is
represented with a linear combination of basis images. The dimen-
sions of the matrix factors W and H are n 3 r and r 3 m, respec-
tively. The rank r of the factorization is generally chosen so that
ðn þ mÞr , nm, and the product WH can be regarded as a com-
pressed form of the data in V.

The differences between PCA, VQ and NMF arise from different
constraints imposed on the matrix factors W and H. In VQ, each
column of H is constrained to be a unary vector, with one element
equal to unity and the other elements equal to zero. In other words,
every face (column of V) is approximated by a single basis image
(column of W) in the factorization V < WH. Such a unary encod-
ing for a particular face is shown next to the VQ basis in Fig. 1. This
unary representation forces VQ to learn basis images that are
prototypical faces.

788

© 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 401 | 21 OCTOBER 1999 | www.nature.com

letters to nature

PCA constrains the columns of W to be orthonormal and the
rows of H to be orthogonal to each other. This relaxes the unary
constraint of VQ, allowing a distributed representation in which
each face is approximated by a linear combination of all the basis
images, or eigenfaces6. A distributed encoding of a particular face is
shown next to the eigenfaces in Fig. 1. Although eigenfaces have a
statistical interpretation as the directions of largest variance, many
of them do not have an obvious visual interpretation. This is
because PCA allows the entries of W and H to be of arbitrary sign.
As the eigenfaces are used in linear combinations that generally
involve complex cancellations between positive and negative
numbers, many individual eigenfaces lack intuitive meaning.

NMF does not allow negative entries in the matrix factors W and
H. Unlike the unary constraint of VQ, these non-negativity con-
straints permit the combination of multiple basis images to repre-
sent a face. But only additive combinations are allowed, because the
non-zero elements of W and H are all positive. In contrast to PCA,
no subtractions can occur. For these reasons, the non-negativity
constraints are compatible with the intuitive notion of combining
parts to form a whole, which is how NMF learns a parts-based
representation.

As can be seen from Fig. 1, the NMF basis and encodings contain
a large fraction of vanishing coefﬁcients, so both the basis images
and image encodings are sparse. The basis images are sparse because
they are non-global and contain several versions of mouths, noses
and other facial parts, where the various versions are in different
locations or forms. The variability of a whole face is generated by
combining these different parts. Although all parts are used by at

least one face, any given face does not use all the available parts. This
results in a sparsely distributed image encoding, in contrast to the
unary encoding of VQ and the fully distributed PCA encoding7–9.
We implemented NMF with the update rules for Wand H given in
Fig. 2. Iteration of these update rules converges to a local maximum
of the objective function

F ¼ ^n

^m

½V imlogðWHÞim

2 ðWHÞimÿ

i¼1

m¼1

ð2Þ

subject to the non-negativity constraints described above. This
objective function can be derived by interpreting NMF as a
method for constructing a probabilistic model of image generation.
In this model, an image pixel Vim is generated by adding Poisson
noise to the product (WH)im. The objective function in equation (2)
is then related to the likelihood of generating the images in V from
the basis W and encodings H.

The exact form of the objective function is not as crucial as the
non-negativity constraints for the success of NMF in learning parts.
A squared error objective function can be optimized with update
rules for W and H different from those in Fig. 2 (refs 10, 11). These
update rules yield results similar to those shown in Fig. 1, but have
the technical disadvantage of requiring the adjustment of a parameter
controlling the learning rate. This parameter is generally adjusted
through trial and error, which can be a time-consuming process if
the matrix V is very large. Therefore, the update rules described in
Fig. 2 may be advantageous for applications involving large data-
bases.

Figure 1 Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) learns a parts-based representation of
faces, whereas vector quantization (VQ) and principal components analysis (PCA) learn
holistic representations. The three learning methods were applied to a database of
m ¼ 2;429 facial images, each consisting of n ¼ 19 3 19 pixels, and constituting an
n3 mmatrix V. All three ﬁnd approximate factorizations of the form V < WH, but with
three different types of constraints on Wand H, as described more fully in the main text
and methods. As shown in the 7 3 7 montages, each method has learned a set of
r ¼ 49 basis images. Positive values are illustrated with black pixels and negative values
with red pixels. A particular instance of a face, shown at top right, is approximately
represented by a linear superposition of basis images. The coefﬁcients of the linear
superposition are shown next to each montage, in a 7 3 7 grid, and the resulting
superpositions are shown on the other side of the equality sign. Unlike VQ and PCA, NMF
learns to represent faces with a set of basis images resembling parts of faces.

NMF

VQ

PCA

Original

=

=

=

NATURE | VOL 401 | 21 OCTOBER 1999 | www.nature.com

© 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

789

·
·
·
letters to nature

It is helpful to visualize the dependencies between image pixels
and encoding variables in the form of the network shown in Fig. 3.
The top layer of nodes represents an encoding h1,…,hr (column of
H), and the bottom layer an image v1,…,vn (column of V). The
matrix element Wia quantiﬁes the amount of inﬂuence that the ath
encoding variable ha has on the ith image pixel vi. A single encoding
variable inﬂuences multiple image pixels, owing to the fan-out of
connections from the encoding variable. Because of the non-
negativity of Wia, this inﬂuence is restricted to coactivation of
image pixels. Intuitively, a parts-based representation should be
learnable from observations of coactivation in V, as the image pixels
belonging to the same part of the face are coactivated when that part
is present. NMF learns by adapting Wia to generate the appropriate
coactivations.

The preceding description of NMF has been specialized to
images, but the algorithm is actually applicable to a wide variety
of problem domains. More generally, NMF is a method for
modelling the generation of directly observable visible variables V
from hidden variables H (refs 12, 13). Each hidden variable
coactivates a subset of visible variables, or ‘part’. Activation of a
constellation of hidden variables combines these parts additively to
generate a whole. Seen in this light, NMF has a very broad range of
potential applications. We illustrate this versatility by applying
NMF to a completely different problem, the semantic analysis of
text documents.

For this application, a corpus of documents is summarized by a
matrix V, where Vim is the number of times the ith word in the
vocabulary appears in the mth document14. These word counts can
be regarded as a set of visible variables and modelled as being
generated from an underlying set of hidden variables. Application of
VQ, PCA or NMF involves ﬁnding the approximate factorization of
this matrix V < WH into a feature set W and hidden variables H, in
the same way as was done for faces.

In the VQ factorization, a single hidden variable is active for each
document. If the same hidden variable is active for a group of
documents, they are semantically related, because they have similar
frequencies of word occurrence. Consequently, the hidden variables
are called semantic variables, and VQ is accordingly used for
automatic semantic indexing of documents by topic14. Each
column of W, or semantic feature, consists of the word frequencies
for the corresponding semantic variable.

VQ allows only one semantic variable to be active, which prevents
more than one topic from being attributed to a document. PCA
would seem to be a solution to this problem, as it allows activation
of multiple semantic variables. Although PCA has been successful in

certain linguistic tasks15, it generally results in semantic variables
that are difﬁcult to interpret, for much the same reason that the PCA
representation of faces has no obvious visual interpretation. This is
the result of two unrealistic aspects of the model: all semantic
variables are used to represent each document; and negative values
for semantic variables are allowed. Intuitively, it makes more sense
for each document to be associated with some small subset of a large
array of topics, rather than just one topic or all the topics. Because
the sparsely distributed representation of NMF appears ideally
suited for this purpose, we applied NMF to the semantic analysis
of a corpus of encyclopedia articles.

Some of the semantic features (r ¼ 200, columns of W) discov-
ered by NMF are shown in Fig. 4. In each semantic feature, the
algorithm has grouped together semantically related words. Each
article in the encyclopedia is represented by additively combining
several of these features. For example, to represent the article about
the ‘Constitution of the United States’, the semantic feature contain-
ing ‘supreme’ and ‘court’ and the one containing ‘president’ and
‘congress’ are coactivated.

In addition to grouping semantically related words together into
semantic features, the algorithm uses context to differentiate
between multiple meanings of the same word. For example, the
word ‘lead’ appears with high frequency in two semantic features
shown in Fig. 4: it occurs with ‘metal’, ‘copper’ and ‘steel’ in one,
whereas it appears with ‘person’, ‘rules’ and ‘law’ in the other. This
demonstrates that NMF can deal with the polysemy of ‘lead’ by
disambiguating two of its meanings in the corpus of documents.

Although NMF is successful in learning facial parts and semantic
topics, this success does not imply that the method can learn parts
from any database, such as images of objects viewed from extremely
different viewpoints, or highly articulated objects. Learning parts
for these complex cases is likely to require fully hierarchical models
with multiple levels of hidden variables, instead of the single level in
NMF. Although non-negativity constraints may help such models
to learn parts-based representations13, we do not claim that they are
sufﬁcient in themselves. Also, NMF does not learn anything about
the ‘syntactic’ relationships between parts. NMF assumes that the
hidden variables are non-negative, but makes no further assumptions
about their statistical dependencies.

This is in contrast to independent components analysis (ICA),
a variant of PCA that assumes that the hidden variables are
statistically independent and non-gaussian16,12. Applying ICA to
the facial images to make the encodings independent results in basis
images that are holistic. The independence assumption of ICA is ill-
suited for learning parts-based representations because various

W
ia

W
ia

m

W
ia

H

m

a

V
m
i
(
WH

)

m
i

W
ia
W

j

ja

H

m
a

H

m
a

W
ia

V
m
i
(
WH

)

m
i

i

W

v1

h1

. . .

hr

. . .

Æ væ  = Wh

vn

Figure 2 Iterative algorithm for non-negative matrix factorization. Starting from non-
negative initial conditions for Wand H, iteration of these update rules for non-negative V
ﬁnds an approximate factorization V < WH by converging to a local maximum of the
objective function given in equation (2). The ﬁdelity of the approximation enters the
updates through the quotient Vim/(WH)im. Monotonic convergence can be proven using
techniques similar to those used in proving the convergence of the EM algorithm22,23. The
update rules preserve the non-negativity of Wand Hand also constrain the columns of W
to sum to unity. This sum constraint is a convenient way of eliminating the degeneracy
associated with the invariance of WHunder the transformation W! WL, H! L 2 1H,
where L is a diagonal matrix.

Figure 3 Probabilistic hidden variables model underlying non-negative matrix
factorization. The model is diagrammed as a network depicting how the visible variables
v1,…,vnin the bottom layer of nodes are generated from the hidden variables h1,…,hrin
the top layer of nodes. According to the model, the visible variables viare generated from a
probability distribution with mean SaWiaha. In the network diagram, the inﬂuence of ha
on viis represented by a connection with strength Wia. In the application to facial images,
the visible variables are the image pixels, whereas the hidden variables contain the parts-
based encoding. For ﬁxed a, the connection strengths W1a,…,Wna constitute a speciﬁc
basis image (right middle) which is combined with other basis images to represent a whole
facial image (right bottom).

790

© 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

NATURE | VOL 401 | 21 OCTOBER 1999 | www.nature.com

(cid:229)
‹
(cid:229)
‹
(cid:229)
‹
parts are likely to occur together. This results in complex depen-
dencies between the hidden variables that cannot be captured by
algorithms that assume independence in the encodings. An alter-
native application of ICA is to transform the PCA basis images, to
make the images rather than the encodings as statistically indepen-
dent as possible18. This results in a basis that is non-global; however,
in this representation all the basis images are used in cancelling
combinations to represent an individual face, and thus the encod-
ings are not sparse. In contrast, the NMF representation contains
both a basis and encoding that are naturally sparse, in that many of
the components are exactly equal to zero. Sparseness in both the
basis and encodings is crucial for a parts-based representation.

The algorithm of Fig. 2 performs both learning and inference
simultaneously. That is, it both learns a set of basis images and
infers values for the hidden variables from the visible variables.
Although the generative model of Fig. 3 is linear, the inference
computation is nonlinear owing to the non-negativity constraints.
The computation is similar to maximum likelihood reconstruction
in emission tomography19, and deconvolution of blurred astro-
nomical images20,21.

According to the generative model of Fig. 3, visible variables are
generated from hidden variables by a network containing excitatory
connections. A neural network that infers the hidden from the
visible variables requires the addition of inhibitory feedback con-
nections. NMF learning is then implemented through plasticity in
the synaptic connections. A full discussion of such a network is
beyond the scope of this letter. Here we only point out the

court
government
council
culture
supreme
constitutional
rights
justice

president
served
governor
secretary
senate
congress
presidential
elected

flowers
leaves
plant
perennial
flower
plants
growing
annual

disease
behaviour
glands
contact
symptoms
skin
pain
infection

Encyclopedia entry:
'Constitution of the

United States'

president (148)
congress (124)
power (120)
united (104)
constitution (81)
amendment (71)
government (57)
law (49)

metal process method paper ... glass copper lead steel

person example time people ... rules lead leads law

Figure 4 Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) discovers semantic features of
m ¼ 30;991 articles from the Grolier encyclopedia. For each word in a vocabulary of size
n ¼ 15;276, the number of occurrences was counted in each article and used to form the
15;276 3 30;991 matrix V. Each column of Vcontained the word counts for a particular
article, whereas each row of Vcontained the counts of a particular word in different
articles. The matrix was approximately factorized into the form WHusing the algorithm
described in Fig. 2. Upper left, four of the r ¼ 200 semantic features (columns of W). As
they are very high-dimensional vectors, each semantic feature is represented by a list of
the eight words with highest frequency in that feature. The darkness of the text indicates
the relative frequency of each word within a feature. Right, the eight most frequent words
and their counts in the encyclopedia entry on the ‘Constitution of the United States’. This
word count vector was approximated by a superposition that gave high weight to the
upper two semantic features, and none to the lower two, as shown by the four shaded
squares in the middle indicating the activities of H. The bottom of the ﬁgure exhibits the
two semantic features containing ‘lead’ with high frequencies. Judging from the other
words in the features, two different meanings of ‘lead’ are differentiated by NMF.

letters to nature

consequence of
the non-negativity constraints, which is that
synapses are either excitatory or inhibitory, but do not change
sign. Furthermore, the non-negativity of the hidden and visible
variables corresponds to the physiological fact that the ﬁring rates of
neurons cannot be negative. We propose that the one-sided con-
straints on neural activity and synaptic strengths in the brain may be
important for developing sparsely distributed, parts-based repre-
M
sentations for perception.

Methods
The facial images used in Fig. 1 consisted of frontal views hand-aligned in a 19 3 19 grid.
For each image, the greyscale intensities were ﬁrst linearly scaled so that the pixel mean and
standard deviation were equal to 0.25, and then clipped to the range [0,1]. NMF was
performed with the iterative algorithm described in Fig. 2, starting with random initial
conditions for W and H. The algorithm was mostly converged after less than 50 iterations;
the results shown are after 500 iterations, which took a few hours of computation time on a
Pentium II computer. PCA was done by diagonalizing the matrix VVT. The 49 eigenvectors
with the largest eigenvalues are displayed. VQ was done via the k-means algorithm,
starting from random initial conditions for W and H.

In the semantic analysis application of Fig. 4, the vocabulary was deﬁned as the 15,276
most frequent words in the database of Grolier encyclopedia articles, after removal of the
430 most common words, such as ‘the’ and ‘and’. Because most words appear in relatively
few articles, the word count matrix V is extremely sparse, which speeds up the algorithm.
The results shown are after the update rules of Fig. 2 were iterated 50 times starting from
random initial conditions for W and H.

Received 24 May; accepted 6 August 1999.

1. Palmer, S. E. Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation. Cogn. Psychol. 9, 441–474 (1977).
2. Wachsmuth, E., Oram, M. W. & Perrett, D. I. Recognition of objects and their component parts:
responses of single units in the temporal cortex of the macaque. Cereb. Cortex 4, 509–522 (1994).
3. Logothetis, N. K. & Sheinberg, D. L. Visual object recognition. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 577–621

(1996).

4. Biederman, I. Recognition-by-components: a theory of human image understanding. Psychol. Rev. 94,

115–147 (1987).

5. Ullman, S. High-Level Vision: Object Recognition and Visual Cognition (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,

1996).

6. Turk, M. & Pentland, A. Eigenfaces for recognition. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 3, 71–86 (1991).
7. Field, D. J. What is the goal of sensory coding? Neural Comput. 6, 559–601 (1994).
8. Foldiak, P. & Young, M. Sparse coding in the primate cortex. The Handbook of Brain Theory and

Neural Networks 895–898 (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1995).

9. Olshausen, B. A. & Field, D. J. Emergence of simple-cell receptive ﬁeld properties by learning a sparse

code for natural images. Nature 381, 607–609 (1996).

10. Lee, D. D. & Seung, H. S. Unsupervised learning by convex and conic coding. Adv. Neural Info. Proc.

Syst. 9, 515–521 (1997).

11. Paatero, P. Least squares formulation of robust non-negative factor analysis. Chemometr. Intell. Lab.

37, 23–35 (1997).

12. Nakayama, K. & Shimojo, S. Experiencing and perceiving visual surfaces. Science 257, 1357–1363

(1992).

13. Hinton, G. E., Dayan, P., Frey, B. J. & Neal, R. M. The ‘‘wake-sleep’’ algorithm for unsupervised neural

networks. Science 268, 1158–1161 (1995).

14. Salton, G. & McGill, M. J. Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval (McGraw-Hill, New York,

1983).

15. Landauer, T. K. & Dumais, S. T. The latent semantic analysis theory of knowledge. Psychol. Rev. 104,

211–240 (1997).

16. Jutten, C. & Herault, J. Blind separation of sources, part I: An adaptive algorithm based on

neuromimetic architecture. Signal Proc. 24, 1–10 (1991).

17. Bell, A. J. & Sejnowski, T. J. An information maximization approach to blind separation and blind

deconvolution. Neural Comput. 7, 1129–1159 (1995).

18. Bartlett, M. S., Lades, H. M. & Sejnowski, T. J. Independent component representations for face

recognition. Proc. SPIE 3299, 528–539 (1998).

19. Shepp, L. A. & Vardi, Y. Maximum likelihood reconstruction for emission tomography. IEEE Trans.

Med. Imaging. 2, 113–122 (1982).

20. Richardson, W. H. Bayesian-based iterative method of image restoration. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 62, 55–59

(1972).

21. Lucy, L. B. An iterative technique for the rectiﬁcation of observed distributions. Astron. J. 74, 745–754

(1974).

22. Dempster, A. P., Laired, N. M. & Rubin, D. B. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM

algorithm. J. Royal Stat. Soc. 39, 1–38 (1977).

23. Saul, L. & Pereira, F. Proceedings of the Second Conference on Empirical Methods n Natural Language

Processing (eds Cardie, C. & Weischedel, R.) 81–89 (Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1997).

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support of Bell Laboratories and MIT. C. Papageorgiou and T. Poggio
provided us with the database of faces, and R. Sproat with the Grolier encyclopedia corpus.
We thank L. Saul for convincing us of the advantages of EM-type algorithms. We have
beneﬁted from discussions with B. Anderson, K. Clarkson, R. Freund, L. Kaufman,
E. Rietman, S. Roweis, N. Rubin, J. Tenenbaum, N. Tishby, M. Tsodyks, T. Tyson and
M. Wright.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.S.S.

NATURE | VOL 401 | 21 OCTOBER 1999 | www.nature.com

© 1999 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

791

·
»
